# spatial-terms-translations

This repository contains the data and analysis code for an empirical information Bottleneck analysis on the semantic encoding of spatial adpositions (e.g., *sur*, *dans*) across French, English, German, and Serbian.

The notebook `analysis.ipynb` is divided into 4 main steps :
1. Modelling the psychological space of spatial relations
This section leverages results from a pile-sorting experiment (stored in the `pile_sorting_results` folder) to model the space of spatial relations evoked by spatial prepositions.
2. Building alignment tables
This section exploits the parallel corpus from LIFAT (2024). A subset of prepositions have further been annotated with spatial meanings (stored into `data/en80jours_aligned.pkl`).
3. LLM translations processing
Steps 1 and 2 are applied to translations generated by a LLM(stored into `data/gptmini_translations.pkl`)
4. IB analysis
This section implements an efficiency analysis of translation of prepositions, based on the work from Zaslavsky et al. (2018) and Chen et al. (2023)

## References

- LIFAT, LLL, & Université de Belgrade. (2024). *En80jours*. ORTOLANG (Open Resources and TOols for LANGuage). https://www.ortolang.fr

- Zaslavsky, N., Kemp, C., Regier, T., & Tishby, N. (2018). Efficient compression in color naming and its evolution. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, 115(31), 7937–7942. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800521115

- Chen, S., Futrell, R., & Mahowald, K. (2023). An information-theoretic approach to the typology of spatial demonstratives. *Cognition*, 240, 105505.